Upgradeability (#1)
hugopeixoto/Open-Grants-Program: applications/upgradeability-by-proxy.md

# Open Grant Proposal

> * **Project Name:** Smart Contract Upgradeability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Project Name:** ink! Smart Contract Upgradeability
```

> * **Team Name:** Fractal?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Team Name:** Fractal
```

* **Payment Address:** lolcrypto

*The above combination of your GitHub account submitting the application and payment address will be your unique identifier during the program. Please keep them safe.*

> ^ wat

Reviewer: That probably just means "don't lose access to either"

## Project Overview :page_facing_up:

### Overview

Smart contract upgradeability is important, because bugs, and allowing for new
features. Upgrades may be constrained, like needing to have votes to upgrade,
or something. Very flexible, this proposal.

It would be nice if it were easy to use this when building with the smart
contracts pallet.

> Our team is interested in this because something.

Reviewer: It is very likely that at least part of our development efforts will relate to smart contracts. Upgradeability is important not just because bugs but because product discovery will constantly provide new inputs.

> Our team is interested in this because something.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our team is interested in this because it is very likely that our development efforts start with smart contracts before moving to a custom Substrate runtime. Upgradeability is important not just because bugs but because product discovery will constantly provide new inputs.
```

how to handle state (which will be stored in the proxy, probably?) migrations
when the implementation is upgraded.

We also need to figure out how to handle upgrade authorization. We want this to
be customizable, so that each contract can have its own logic for permitting
upgrades. Can the authorization code itself be upgradeable? I don't see why
not. Should it be a third contract that is upgradeable by itself?

There is the delegator pattern. We're going to start with a template that
contains the migration/authorization code, but whose proxied methods need to be
manually implemented by the smart contract developer. The idea is to focus on
the mechanism itself and not on the syntactic sugar that ink should provide.
Having this should allow folks to use it, even though it won't be super ergonomic.

The second part will be attempting to extract this pattern into an ink directive,
automatically generating the proxied methods. This brings us ergonomy of use, making
upgradeability easy to opt in.

Parts of this may be liftable to the smart contracts pallet. Out of scope
though, for future plans.

### Ecosystem Fit

> Are there any other projects similar to yours? If so, how is your project different?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since smart contract development is more accessible and less involved than runtime development, we expect most folks who build on Polkadot to benefit from this mechanism. Substrate offers a natural development path from smart contracts to runtime, so it's also likely that this will assist folks getting started with smart contracts even if they intend to move to a custom runtime in the future.

We didn't find related ideas in the https://github.com/w3f/General-Grants-Program or https://github.com/w3f/Open-Grants-Program repos. We also asked some folks in the community, none of whom were aware of similar projects.
```

## Team :busts_in_silhouette:

### Team members

> * Name of team leader
> * Names of team members	

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Hugo Peixoto](https://github.com/hugopeixoto/) and [Júlio Santos](https://github.com/juliosantos/)
```

### Contact

> * **Contact Name:** Full name of the contact person (e.g. John Brown)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Contact Name:** Júlio Santos
```

> * **Contact Email:** Contact email (e.g. john@duo.com)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Contact Email:** julio@fractal.id
```

> * Website

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* https://trustfractal.com/
```

### Legal Structure 

> * **Registered Address:** Address of your registered legal entity, if available. Please keep it on one line. (e.g. High Street 1, London LK1 234, UK)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Registered Address:** Wiener Straße 10, 10999 Berlin, Germany
```

> * **Registered Legal Entity:** Name of your registered legal entity, if available. (e.g. Duo Ltd.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Registered Legal Entity:** Trust Fractal GmbH
```

### Team's experience

> - link to randomness pseudo-paper?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Back in 2017, we've implemented a card game ([Baccarat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baccarat_(card_game))) in Solidity. EVM and Solidity have no primitives to generate random numbers, as there is no trustworthy source of entropy available on the blockchain — so we described and built a method for provably fair random number generation with a non-repudiable commitment scheme. This was implemented using state channels for reduced latency and cost. It was built for a client who now owns the IP, so we can't share anything else here, but can do in private if needed.
* In early 2018 we built a prototype of on-chain KYC using the [ERC 725](https://github.com/ethereum/eips/issues/725) and [ERC 735](https://github.com/ethereum/eips/issues/735) standards. See [our medium post](https://hackernoon.com/first-impressions-with-erc-725-and-erc-735-identity-and-claims-4a87ff2509c9) on this for more information.
* In late 2018, we built our first on-chain KYC integration with DIDs and verifiable credentials, when working with https://ixo.world/. Once we confirmed that a user controlled a certain address (by asking them to sign a nonce), we would create their DID on their behalf. Once their KYC verification completed, we would ledger the corresponding credential against this DID. See [our Medium post on this](https://medium.com/hackernoon/decentralized-identity-w3c-standards-and-the-ixo-keysafe-69d7e8d6fd7c) for more information.
* We're currently working with [KILT](https://www.kilt.io/) to deliver a decentralised KYC solution for [Polkadex](https://www.polkadex.trade/). See [KILT's medium post on this](https://kilt-protocol.medium.com/fractal-kilt-protocol-and-polkadex-collaborate-to-provide-decentralised-kyc-solution-for-exchange-d9d0f8c18163) for more information.
```

> - link to randomness pseudo-paper?
> - smart contract development?
> - icos?
> - IXO stuff?
> - https://forever.lifeonmars.pt/?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Back in 2017, we've implemented a card game ([Baccarat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baccarat_(card_game))) in Solidity. EVM and Solidity have no primitives to generate random numbers, as there is no trustworthy source of entropy available on the blockchain — so we described and built a method for provably fair random number generation with a non-repudiable commitment scheme. This was implemented using state channels for reduced latency and cost. It was built for a client who now owns the IP, so we can't share anything else here, but can do in private if needed.
* In 2017-2018 we built and operated an ICO launchpad to help teams building on blockchain, such as the [Ocean Protocol](https://oceanprotocol.com/), to crowdfund their projects with community support. See [this Medium post](https://medium.com/future-energy-ventures/why-we-invested-in-fractal-d98eaf0cdc70) from [Innogy](https://www.eon.de/de/innogy.html), an early investor in Fractal, for more information.
* In early 2018 we built a prototype of on-chain KYC using the [ERC 725](https://github.com/ethereum/eips/issues/725) and [ERC 735](https://github.com/ethereum/eips/issues/735) standards. See [our medium post](https://hackernoon.com/first-impressions-with-erc-725-and-erc-735-identity-and-claims-4a87ff2509c9) on this for more information.
* In late 2018, we built our first on-chain KYC integration with DIDs and verifiable credentials, when working with https://ixo.world/. Once we confirmed that a user controlled a certain address (by asking them to sign a nonce), we would create their DID on their behalf. Once their KYC verification completed, we would ledger the corresponding credential against this DID. See [our Medium post on this](https://medium.com/hackernoon/decentralized-identity-w3c-standards-and-the-ixo-keysafe-69d7e8d6fd7c) for more information.
* We're currently working with [KILT](https://www.kilt.io/) to deliver a decentralised KYC solution for [Polkadex](https://www.polkadex.trade/). See [KILT's medium post on this](https://kilt-protocol.medium.com/fractal-kilt-protocol-and-polkadex-collaborate-to-provide-decentralised-kyc-solution-for-exchange-d9d0f8c18163) for more information.
```

### Team Code Repos
* https://github.com/<your_repo_1>

> * https://github.com/<your_repo_2>

Reviewer: * https://github.com/trustfractal/ixo-chain
* https://github.com/trustfractal/erc725

Author: I think they mean the repos for the project in scope.

### Team LinkedIn Profiles
* https://www.linkedin.com/<person_1>

> * https://www.linkedin.com/<person_2>

Reviewer: * https://www.linkedin.com/in/hugopeixoto/
* https://www.linkedin.com/in/jvsantos

# Open Grant Proposal

* **Project Name:** ink! Smart Contract Upgradeability
* **Team Name:** Fractal

> * **Payment Address:** lolcrypto

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Payment Address:** `0xAd0E9D4CF6B8F2E0C12c6620791164681c99A9ca`
```

## Project Overview :page_facing_up:

### Overview

The main goal of this project is to bring smart contract upgradeability to ink.

> Smart contract upgradeability is an important mechanism to fix security bugs in
> contracts. It's also important to have flexibility of adding new features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart contract upgradeability is an important mechanism to fix security bugs in
contracts. It also enables post-deployment iterative development, by offering
the flexibility to add new features, and tweak or remove old ones.
```

> contracts. It's also important to have flexibility of adding new features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contracts. It also enables post-deployment iterative development, by offering
the flexibility to add new features, and tweak or remove old ones.
```

This mechanism should be flexible enough that contract developers may decide if
they want to be able to upgrade their contracts, and specify under what
conditions.

Our team is interested in this because it is very likely that our development
efforts start with smart contracts before moving to a custom Substrate runtime.

> Upgradeability is important not just because bugs but because product discovery
> will constantly provide new inputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another reason upgradeability is particularly important to us is that we expect
to iterate our logic frequently based on a continuous product discovery process.
```

### Project Details

Upgrade functionality can be implemented in user-land, or as part of the smart

> contracts pallet. We are starting with the first option. This gives us more
> flexibility to experiment and iterate on our solution. When we're happy with
> the result, we'll see what can be migrated to ink as a directive to reduce
> boilerplate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contracts pallet. We are starting with the first option: it gives us more
flexibility to experiment, and iterate faster towards an adequate solution.
When we're happy with the result, we'll see what can be migrated to ink as a
directive to reduce boilerplate.
```

Reviewer: (wasn't sure whether it'd be 100% clear to the reader that "this gives" is connected to "first option")

> We're going to start by implementing the proxy pattern. There are a few

Reviewer: At first I was going to suggest adding something like "taking inspiration from OpenZeppelin ([blog post](https://blog.openzeppelin.com/proxy-patterns/), [docs](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/3.x/api/proxy)), but then I found this in [the Ethereum docs](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/tutorials/smart-contract-security-guidelines/#upgradeability):

> We discussed the different upgradeability solutions in [our blogpost](https://blog.trailofbits.com/2018/09/05/contract-upgrade-anti-patterns/). Make a deliberate choice to support upgradeability or not prior to writing any code. The decision will influence how you structure our code. In general, we recommend:
> * Favoring [contract migration](https://blog.trailofbits.com/2018/10/29/how-contract-migration-works/) over upgradeability. Migration system have many of the same advantages than upgradeable, without their drawbacks.
> * Using the data separation pattern over the delegatecallproxy one. If your project has a clear abstraction separation, upgradeability using data separation will necessitate only a few adjustments. The delegatecallproxy requires EVM expertise and is highly error-prone.
> * Document the migration/upgrade procedure before the deployment. If you have to react under stress without any guidelines, you will make mistakes. Write the procedure to follow ahead of time. It should include:
>     * The calls that initiate the new contracts
>     * Where are stored the keys and how to access them
>     * How to check the deployment! Develop and test a post-deployment script.

* in the [first linked blog post](https://blog.trailofbits.com/2018/09/05/contract-upgrade-anti-patterns/), they go into more detail of what and why is considered to be an anti-pattern for contract upgrades
* in the [second](https://blog.trailofbits.com/2018/10/29/how-contract-migration-works/), they elaborate further and propose this "contract migration" concept

Can you have a look and see what we can learn from this? That is, if it applies to us at all — I didn't read attentively, but if there's already better established ways to do this, I'd strongly consider revisiting the proposal direction.

Author: The "contract migration" proposal is basically "throw out your contract and use a new one, and here's a bunch of issues you'll have doing that, btw". They don't propose a different way of solving upgradeability, they ask you to sidestep it unless you really need it.

The first link has some interesting implementation bugs, some of them are a bit EVM specific, but it's probably good to go through them when implementing the thing.

I don't think there's anything here that influences the proposal, but I do think it's worth keeping these in mind while implementing the mechanism to avoid falling into the same traps.

Reviewer: Gotcha, thank you!

concerns that will need to be addressed:

- figure out how to handle the separation between state and code
- design a standard for data migrations on contract upgrade
- design a standard for upgrade authorization
- decide if the contract's public interface can/should be upgradable or static

We want to allow for flexibility when deciding if a smart contract can be
upgradable or not, and under what circumstances. Should we allow upgrades to
the authorization code?

Upgrading the contract's public interface may not be possible when using the
proxy pattern.

Ink's documentation and examples provide us with the delegator pattern. This
contract works by calling `put_code` once for the delegator contract and once
for the "delegated-to" contract. Every method that is delegated must be
explicitly defined in the delegator.

> During milestone 1, we will build a template using this pattern with upgrade
> and authorization methods. This is a template and not a library/ink directive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Milestone 1, we will build a template using this pattern with upgrade and
authorization methods. This is a template and not a library/ink directive
```

Reviewer: (a milestone is a target, not a process)

because we want to focus on the upgrade pattern mechanism and leave any ink

> syntax sugar for the second milestone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quality-of-life improvements, like directives or syntax sugar, for the second milestone.
```

> During milestone 2, we will be extract this pattern into an ink directive,
> automatically generating the proxied methods. This brings us ergonomy of use,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For milestone 2, we will extract this pattern into an ink directive which will
automatically generate the proxied methods. This brings us ergonomy of use,
```

> making upgradeability easy to opt in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
making upgradeability easy to opt in to.
```

Parts of this work may be liftable to the smart contracts pallet. This isn't in

> the scope of this proposal, but may be considered for future work.

Reviewer: Can you elaborate a bit on why this would be interesting to do?

  725](https://github.com/ethereum/eips/issues/725) and [ERC
  735](https://github.com/ethereum/eips/issues/735) standards. See [our medium
  post](https://hackernoon.com/first-impressions-with-erc-725-and-erc-735-identity-and-claims-4a87ff2509c9)
  on this for more information.
* In late 2018, we built our first on-chain KYC integration with DIDs and
  verifiable credentials, when working with https://ixo.world/. Once we
  confirmed that a user controlled a certain address (by asking them to sign a
  nonce), we would create their DID on their behalf. Once their KYC
  verification completed, we would ledger the corresponding credential against
  this DID. See [our Medium post on
  this](https://medium.com/hackernoon/decentralized-identity-w3c-standards-and-the-ixo-keysafe-69d7e8d6fd7c)
  for more information.
* We're currently working with [KILT](https://www.kilt.io/) to deliver a
  decentralised KYC solution for [Polkadex](https://www.polkadex.trade/). See
  [KILT's medium post on
  this](https://kilt-protocol.medium.com/fractal-kilt-protocol-and-polkadex-collaborate-to-provide-decentralised-kyc-solution-for-exchange-d9d0f8c18163)
  for more information.

### Team Code Repos

> None yet. Work in progress will be available under [Fractal's
> organization](https://github.com/trustfractal/), and ideally merged into
> https://github.com/paritytech/ink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* https://github.com/trustfractal/ink-upgrade-template
* https://github.com/trustfractal/ink
* eventually https://github.com/paritytech/ink, we hope :)
```
